# Start Project using Typescript, Fastify

## Typescript Key features

- **Static Typing**: TypeScript introduces static typing, allowing developers to specify the data types of variables, function parameters, and return values. This helps catch type-related errors during development and provides better code documentation.
- **Type Inference**: TypeScript's type inference system automatically deduces the types of variables and expressions based on their usage, reducing the need for explicit type annotations while still providing strong type checking.
- **Interfaces and Classes**: TypeScript supports the definition of interfaces and classes, enabling developers to create well-defined contracts for objects and implement object-oriented programming principles.
- **Enums**: Enums allow you to define a set of named constants, which can make your code more readable and maintainable.
- **Decorators**: TypeScript supports decorators, which are used for metadata annotations and can be applied to classes, methods, properties, and parameters. Decorators are often used in frameworks like Angular.
- **Advanced JavaScript Features**: TypeScript supports modern JavaScript features, including ECMAScript 6 (ES6) and beyond, making it possible to write code using the latest language features and transpile it to widely supported JavaScript versions.
- **Compatibility**: TypeScript code can be transpiled to older JavaScript versions, ensuring compatibility with a wide range of browsers and platforms.
**Tooling and IDE Support**: TypeScript provides rich tooling and great integration with popular code editors like Visual Studio Code. This includes features like intelligent code completion, type checking, and refactoring suggestions.
**Readability and Maintainability**: With the help of static typing and other features, TypeScript code tends to be more self-documenting and less error-prone, making it easier to understand and maintain over time.
**Community and Adoption**: TypeScript has gained significant popularity and is widely used in the development of web applications, server-side applications (using frameworks like Node.js), and mobile applications (with frameworks like React Native).

## First steps

To initiate the project and create the `package.json` file, start with running:

```bash
npm init -y
```

Create the `src` folder and the file to set up the server: `server.ts`.

To convert the Typescript code to JavaScript, you need to install Typescript library as a development dependency:

```bash
npm i -D typescript
```

To create the typescript configuration file it's necessary to run:

```bash
npx tsc --init
```

Note: `npx` it's just a way to execute binary files, like `./node_modules/.bin/tsc`.

After running that script, it will be created the `tsconfig.json` file. As of now, it's just necessary to change the `target` to `es2020` to use a recent JavaScript bundle.

---

Note: to run the code and generate the `js` file, execute:

```bash
npx tsc src/server.ts
```

There are ways to automate this!

---

## Fastify

To install Fastify, run the code:

```bash
npm i fastify
```

It's also necessary to install the package @types/node as a development dependency.

```bash
npm install -D @types/node
```

To first configure the server using Fastify:

```js
import fastify from 'fastify'

const app = fastify()

app.get('/hello', () => {
    return 'Hello'
})

app.listen({
    port: 3333,
}).then(() => {
    console.log('HTTP Server Running')
})
```

---

To generate the js file, run the code:

```bash
npx tsc src/server.ts
```

To run the server:

```bash
node src/server.js 
```

---

To automate the process, install `tsx` package as a development dependency:

```bash
npm install tsx -D
```

After installing, the server can be run by executing:

```bash
npx tsx src/server.ts
```

Note: In production environment, it is faster to execute the JavaScript file. TSX only for development.

To facilitate the server execution, create a script on the `package.json` file:

```json
"dev": "tsx watch src/server.ts
```

Note: Watch to continually run the server.

To run the server: `npm run dev`.
