# SQLite

SQLite is a lightweight, serverless, open-source relational database management system (RDBMS) that is widely used for embedding a database directly into applications. Unlike traditional client-server database systems, SQLite operates as a self-contained, file-based database engine that doesn't require a separate server process. It's often referred to as an "embedded database."

SQLite is commonly used for mobile app development, desktop applications, and small to medium-sized projects where a lightweight and easy-to-deploy database solution is needed. It's well-suited for scenarios where a full-fledged client-server database system might be overkill or not necessary. However, it may not be the best choice for large-scale applications that require high concurrency and extensive server-client architecture.

## Key features

- **Self-Contained**: SQLite is a single library that provides all the database functionality. Applications interact directly with the SQLite library, which manages the storage, querying, and manipulation of data.
- **Serverless**: There's no need to set up a separate server process to use SQLite. The database engine is integrated directly into the application, making deployment and distribution easier.
- **Zero Configuration**: SQLite databases are files that reside on the file system. No separate configuration or setup steps are needed to start using SQLite.
- **Cross-Platform**: SQLite is cross-platform and works on various operating systems, including Windows, macOS, Linux, Android, and iOS.
- **Small Footprint**: SQLite has a small memory and storage footprint, making it suitable for resource-constrained environments.
- **ACID Compliance**: SQLite is ACID-compliant, meaning that it ensures data integrity by supporting atomicity, consistency, isolation, and durability in transactions.
- **SQL Compatibility**: SQLite supports a subset of the SQL language, allowing you to create, modify, and query relational databases using SQL statements.
- **Data Types**: SQLite supports common data types like INTEGER, TEXT, REAL (floating-point), BLOB (binary large object), and NULL.
- **Transactions**: SQLite supports transactions, allowing you to group multiple operations into a single unit of work that can be committed or rolled back.
- **Embedding**: Applications can link directly to the SQLite library, making it easy to integrate a database into the application's codebase.
- **Community and Support**: SQLite has a large and active community, providing documentation, tutorials, and support through forums.

## Query Builder

A query builder is a software tool or library that simplifies the process of creating complex database queries using a programmatic interface, usually through a domain-specific language or method chaining. Instead of writing raw SQL queries, developers can use a query builder to construct queries using a more structured and intuitive syntax. The query builder then generates the corresponding SQL query for execution against a database.

## Knex.js

Guide: `knexjs.org/guide/#node-js`

To install Knex and the `sqlite` driver:

```bash
npm install knex sqlite3
```

To configure the database, create the `database.ts` file inside `src` folder:

```typescript
import { knex as setupKnex } from 'knex'

export const knex = setupKnex({
    client: 'sqlite',
    connection: {
        filename: './db/app.db',
    },
    useNullAsDefault: true,
})
```

Note: create the `db` folder in the root of your application.

To test if the database connection is working, edit the `server.ts` file:

```typescript
app.get('/hello', async () => {
    const tables = await knex('sqlite_schema').select('*')

    return tables
})
```

Note: remember to import the `knex` function from `database.ts` file.

After running the code, the `app.db` will be created.

Note: Create a `.gitignore` file and add the files/folders that should not be added into git.

```text
node_modules
db/app.db
```
