# Configure first migration

In the context of database migrations, the terms "up" and "down" refer to two important methods that are used to apply and revert changes to the database schema.

**Up Method:**
The "up" method is responsible for applying the changes to the database schema. It contains the code that defines how the database should be altered to incorporate the new changes introduced by the migration. This method is executed when the migration is run in order to bring the database schema up to date.

In an "up" method, you might find code that performs tasks such as creating new tables, adding columns, modifying constraints, or performing any other database-related operations needed to reflect the changes described in the migration.

**Down Method:**
The "down" method is the reverse of the "up" method. It defines the steps to revert or undo the changes made by the corresponding "up" method. If, for any reason, you need to roll back a migration, the "down" method is executed.

The "down" method typically contains the opposite operations of the "up" method. For example, if the "up" method added a new column, the "down" method would remove that column. If the "up" method created a new table, the "down" method would drop that table.

## Define and run migration

On the migration created, it's necessary to code the up and down method for the migration, in order to create the table and it's fields as well as drop the table in case something does not work.

```js
import { Knex } from "knex";

export async function up(knex: Knex): Promise<void> {
    await knex.schema.createTable('transactions', (table) => {
        table.uuid('id').primary()
        table.text('title').notNullable()
        table.decimal('amount', 10, 2).notNullable()
        table.timestamp('created_at').defaultTo(knex.fn.now()).notNullable()
    })
}


export async function down(knex: Knex): Promise<void> {
    await knex.schema.dropTable('transactions')
}
```

To run the migration:

```bash
npm run knex -- migrate:latest
```

Note: If a migration was already shared and run from another team member, you cannot change the migration. If you need to edit a field or something on the migration, it's necessary to create a new migration to fix that.

To roll back a migration (that was not previously shared with others):

```bash
npm run knex -- migrate:rollback
```

## Alter a table via migrations

Create a new migration to add the field session_id to table `transactions`:

```bash
npm run knex -- migrate:make add-session-id-to-transactions
```

On the new migration file, create the column on the `up` method and drop the column on the ´down´ method:

```js
export async function up(knex: Knex): Promise<void> {
    await knex.schema.alterTable('transactions', (table) => {
        table.uuid('session_id').after('id').index()
    })
}

export async function down(knex: Knex): Promise<void> {
    await knex.schema.alterTable('transactions', (table) => {
        table.dropColumn('session_id')
    })
}
```

Creating an index on a field in a database table involves optimizing the retrieval and search performance of data stored in that table. An index is a database structure that provides a faster way to look up data based on the values in specific columns. It essentially acts like a "lookup table" that improves the speed of data retrieval operations.

However, it's important to note that while indexes greatly enhance read operations, they can slightly slow down write operations (such as inserts, updates, and deletes) because the index also needs to be updated when the underlying data changes. Therefore, creating indexes should be a thoughtful decision based on the queries and operations that are most important for your application.

Note: remember to run migrations again.

```bash
npm run knex -- migrate:latest
```

And to check the tables created:

```bash
npm run dev
```

Use httpie to run the GET method:

```bash
http GET localhost:3333/hello
```
