# Environment Variables

Environment variables are dynamic values that are set outside of your application's code and are used to customize the behavior of your application based on the environment it is running in. They are often used to store configuration settings, sensitive information, or other runtime-specific data.

Environment variables are particularly useful in scenarios where you have different environments (such as development, testing, and production) with varying configurations. Instead of hard coding configuration values directly into your code, you can use environment variables to keep these values separate from the codebase. This makes it easier to manage and deploy your application across different environments.

Common use cases for environment variables include:

**Database Connection Information**: Credentials and connection URLs for databases, caching systems, and other data storage services.

**API Keys and Secrets**: Sensitive information like API keys, authentication tokens, and other secrets that should not be hard-coded in the codebase.

**Debugging and Logging**: Configuring logging levels, enabling or disabling debug mode, or specifying log output locations.

**Application Settings**: Custom settings that affect the behavior of the application, such as enabling/disabling features, setting default values, etc.

**URLs and Endpoints**: URLs for external services, APIs, or endpoints that your application interacts with.

**Environment Type**: Identifying the current environment (development, testing, production) to adjust settings accordingly.

**Port Numbers**: Specifying the port on which your application should listen for incoming requests.

## Install DotENV extension on VS Code

To have syntax highlighting for `.env` files, install DotENV extension on VS Code.

## .env File

All variables in this file should be in the format: `KEY = "VALUE"`. Create the `.env` file on the root of your application.

`.env` file:

```js
DATABASE_URL="./db/app"
```

## Read .env File

To read .env file, install the `dotenv` library:

```bash
npm i dotenv
```

## Using config from dotenv

On `database.ts` file, we should import `dotenv/config`.

This will allow the application to read the `.env` file and add all variables on `process.env` that could be used across your application.

Note: In you want to see the environment variables, you can check via `console.log(process.env)`.

And after it's possible to change the `filename` to use `process.env.DATABASE_URL`.

`database.ts` file:

```js
import 'dotenv/config' 

...
connection: {
    filename: process.env.DATABASE_URL,
}

...
```

Note: it will throw en error because `filename` cannot be empty. It will be fixed when Zod is implemented, or you can add a `if` condition to check and see the code running.

Note: Remember to add `.env` on the `.gitignore` file.

## .env good practice

Since the .env file is not going to be pushed, in order to other team members to know what are the environment variables needed, create a `.env.example` file to show what are necessary to configure in your application. This file can be pushed to your repository.

Node: Be careful to not add any password/secrets into the `.env.example` file.

```js
DATABASE_URL="./db/app"
```

## Zod

Zod is a TypeScript-first schema validation library. It is designed to help developers define and validate data schemas in a type-safe and expressive way. Zod focuses on providing a concise and developer-friendly syntax for creating data validation and transformation logic.

**Type-Safety**: Zod leverages TypeScript's type system to provide strong type checking for your data validation logic. This helps catch type-related errors at compile time.

**Declarative Syntax**: Zod offers a declarative syntax for defining data schemas. You can define complex validation rules using a chainable API that reads like a fluent API.

**Built-in Validators**: Zod provides a variety of built-in validators for common data types such as strings, numbers, booleans, objects, arrays, and more.

**Custom Validation**: You can define custom validation logic using functions and combinators provided by Zod, allowing you to create complex validation rules.

**Transformation**: Zod supports data transformation. It allows you to parse and transform data into desired formats.

**Error Handling**: Zod produces detailed error messages when validation fails, making it easier to identify issues in the data.

**Runtime Validation**: Zod can be used for runtime data validation, ensuring that the data adheres to the defined schema.

## Install Zod library

To install Zod library, run:

```bash
npm i zod
```

Create a `env` folder under `src` and create a `index.ts` file.

By creating the variable `env` by parsing the variable `envSchema`, it will allow your application to know all variables inside the schema you created just by calling the method via `env.`.

Basically the validation on `DATABASE_URL` is checking if is a string. If so, no errors will be thrown.

Another example would be to configure the `PORT`, which it can be validated if it's a number and, if no value was informed, what should be the default port. By adding a default value, it implicates that the variable is not required.

Also, it is important to configure the `NODE_ENV`. Which it will be `enum` type, meaning that it should be one of the values passed through, in this case: `development`, `test` or `production`.

At the end, make sure to export the const `env` to be used throughout your application.

`index.ts` file:

```js
import 'dotenv/config' 
import { z } from 'zod'

const envSchema = z.object({
    NODE_ENV: z.enum(['development', 'test', 'production']).default('production'),
    DATABASE_URL: z.string(),
    PORT: z.number().default(3333),
})

export const env = envSchema.parse(process.env)
```

## Update database.ts file

Update `database.ts` file to import the `env` variable and now using it to get the `DATABASE_URL` information.

```js
import { env } from './env' 

...
    connection: {
        filename: env.DATABASE_URL,
    },
...

```

## Update server.ts file

Now you can use the `env.PORT` to update the port information.

```js
import { env } from './env' 

...

app
    .listen({
        port: env.PORT,
    })

...

```

## Edit .env to add NODE_ENV

.env file:

```js
NODE_ENV=development
DATABASE_URL="./db/app.db"
```

.env.example file:

```js
NODE_ENV=development
DATABASE_URL="./db/app.db"
```

## Better handling errors with Zod - Creating customizable error

Instead of using the `parse` method, it's possible to use the `safeParse`. By using it, it's possible to see if there was a failure and let the developer know which variable has error.

Updating the `index.ts` file:

```js
import 'dotenv/config' 
import { z } from 'zod'

const envSchema = z.object({
    NODE_ENV: z.enum(['development', 'test', 'production']).default('production'),
    DATABASE_URL: z.string(),
    PORT: z.number().default(3333),
})

const _env = envSchema.safeParse(process.env)

if (_env.success === false) {
    console.error('Invalid environment variables.', _env.error.format())

    throw new Error('Invalid environment variables.')
}

export const env = _env.data
```
