# Configuring plugins on Fastify

In Fastify, plugins are a powerful way to modularize and encapsulate different parts of your application's functionality. A plugin in Fastify is a piece of functionality that can be added to your Fastify application to extend its capabilities. Plugins can include routes, hooks, middlewares, and other features.

**Modularity**: Plugins help you break down your application into smaller, manageable pieces. Each plugin can encapsulate a specific set of routes, functionalities, or configurations.

**Reusability**: Plugins can be reused across different Fastify applications. This is particularly useful when you have common functionalities that you want to use in multiple projects.

**Encapsulation**: Plugins allow you to encapsulate related logic and configurations within a single unit. This can make your codebase more organized and maintainable.

**Dependency Management**: Plugins can have their own dependencies and configurations. This makes it easier to manage and isolate dependencies for specific parts of your application.

**Async Initialization**: Plugins can perform asynchronous tasks during initialization. This can be useful for setting up database connections, applying configurations, and more.

**Hooks and Middlewares**: Plugins can define hooks and middlewares that are applied globally or selectively to routes within the plugin. This helps in implementing cross-cutting concerns like authentication, logging, etc.

## Define routes as plugins

Create a `routes` folder inside `src` folder and create a `transactions.ts` file inside `routes` folder.

From `server.ts` file, remove the `GET` method to be added into the `transactions.ts` file.

Note: All plugins must be an asynchronous function.

`transactions.ts` file:

```js
import { FastifyInstance } from 'fastify'
import { knex } from '../database'

export async function transactionsRoutes(app: FastifyInstance) {
    app.get('/hello', async () => {
        const transactions = await knex('transactions')
            .select('*')

        return transactions
    })
}
```

Update the `server.ts` file:

```js
import { transactionsRoutes } from './routes/transactions'

app.register(transactionsRoutes)
```

Note: The plugins are executed in order. Make sure that if a specific plugin needs to be run prior to another, that it is up on the list.
