# Using Cookies in Fastify

From a software development perspective, cookies are small pieces of data that a web server sends to a user's web browser while the user is browsing a website. These cookies are then stored by the browser and sent back to the server with subsequent requests. Cookies are commonly used in web development to store user-specific information or to track user behavior across different pages and sessions.

First, it is necessary to install a library `cookie` from Fastify:

```bash
npm i @fastify/cookie
```

In the `server.ts` file, **before the routes are declared**, it's necessary to register the cookie plugin.

```js
import cookie from '@fastify/cookie'

...

app.register(cookie)
```

Back to the `transactions.ts` file, modify the POST method to add the cookie, before inserting the information into the database:

```js
let sessionId = request.cookies.sessionId

if (!sessionId) {
    sessionId = randomUUID()

    reply.cookie('sessionId', sessionId, {
        path: '/',
        maxAge: 1000 * 60 * 60 * 24 * 7 // 7 days
    })
}

await knex('transactions').insert({
    id: randomUUID(),
    title,
    amount: type === 'deposit' ? amount : amount * -1,
    session_id = sessionId
})

```

Cookie parameters:
Path - determine which route will be able to access this information. In this case, '/' means any route.
Expires - all cookies must expire sometime. By using `expires`, it's necessary to specify exactly the date and time that the cookie will expire. A better alternative is using `maxAge`, meaning that how long in milliseconds this cookie will be in the user browser. For a better clean code, use the multiply math function to be specific of how long it will take and add a comment to say how long it's expected. It's easier to maintain the code to change from 7 to 20 if a change needs to be made instead of calculating the information all over.

In order to see the cookie saved, submit a transaction via POST and check the Cookie tab on Insomnia.

By listing the transactions, it's possible to see the session ID saved on the last created transaction.

By doing this way, the cookie is sent automatically, it's not necessary to send via parameter to save the information. This will help to identify who is using the application when there's no user authentication.

## List transactions from the user that created

Change the GET method to consider the session ID created:

```js
app.get('/', async (request, reply) => {
    const sessionId = request.cookies.sessionId

    if (!sessionId) {
        return reply.status(401).send({
            error: 'Unauthorized'
        })
    }

    const transactions = await knex('transactions')
        .where('session_id', sessionId)
        .select()

    return {
        transactions
    }
})
```

On Insomnia, there is a way to Manage Cookies and see the saved cookies from your application. To test the unauthorized flow, it's possible to delete this cookie on Insomnia and submit to list the transactions.

Note: After deleting the cookie to check the unauthorized flow, it will be necessary to create a new transaction to generate a new cookie.

By using `where` to list the transactions, it will only list the transactions from the specific session ID.

## Improving session ID validation

To avoid adding for each endpoint the validation, we will use a **preHandler**.

In Fastify, a **preHandler** is a type of middleware that allows you to perform certain actions before the main handler for a route is executed. It gives you a way to preprocess the request, perform validation, authentication, or any other necessary tasks before the actual route handler is invoked. This can help in keeping your route handlers clean and focused on their main responsibilities.

### Creating middleware

Create a `middlewares` folder inside `src` folder and create the file `check-session-id-exists.ts`.

```js
import { FastifyRequest, FastifyReply } from "fastify"

export async function checkSessionIdExists(request: FastifyRequest, reply: FastifyReply) {
    const sessionId = request.cookies.sessionId

    if (!sessionId) {
        return reply.status(401).send({
            error: 'Unauthorized'
        })
    }
}
```

There's no need to return a success for this scenario because it will be a pre-condition to run the code/route.

### Update the GET method to use the preHandler

```js
import { checkSessionIdExists } from '../middlewares/check-session-id-exists'

app.get('/', {
    preHandler: [checkSessionIdExists],
}, async (request) => {
    const { sessionId } = request.cookies

    const transactions = await knex('transactions')
        .where('session_id', sessionId)
        .select()

    return {
        transactions
    }
})
```

Basically what the code is doing is to execute the preHandler **checkSessionIdExists** before executing the code.

Remember to add the preHandler in all routes that need to check the SessionId.

### Change GET :id

```js
app.get('/:id',  {
    preHandler: [checkSessionIdExists],
}, async (request) => {
    const getTransactionParamsSchema = z.object({
        id: z.string().uuid(),
    })

    const { id } = getTransactionParamsSchema.parse(request.params)

    const { sessionId } = request.cookies

    const transaction = await knex('transactions')
        .where({
            session_id: sessionId,
            id
        })
        .first()

    return {
        transaction
    }
})
```

### Change GET account-balance

```js
app.get('/account-balance', {
    preHandler: [checkSessionIdExists],
}, async (request) => {
    const { sessionId } = request.cookies

    const balance = await knex('transactions')
        .where('session_id', sessionId)
        .sum('amount', { as: 'total' })
        .first()

    return {
        balance
    }
})
```

Note: If there's a need to add a global Hook:

```js
app.addHook('preHandler', async(request, reply) => {

})
```

If this code is added on the `server.ts` file, this means that all methods will execute this preHandler. If this method is added inside the `transactions.ts` file, this means that it will be only executed as part of the transactions routes, for example.
