# Deploy application

First and foremost, in order for the deployment platform to understand the TypeScript code, it's necessary to convert it to JavaScript.

There is a tool that do this for us: `tsup` (that uses `esbuild`).

**Faster Bundling**: `esbuild` is known for its extremely fast bundling speed. It can bundle TypeScript code into JavaScript very quickly, which can significantly reduce build times, especially for large projects.

**Smaller Bundle Sizes**: `esbuild` generates highly optimized and smaller bundle sizes compared to some other bundlers. This can result in faster page load times for your web applications.

**Easy to Configure**: `tsup` simplifies the bundling process and provides a minimal configuration approach, making it easier to set up and use, especially for smaller projects or when you want a quick and straightforward build process.

**Tree Shaking**: `esbuild` has excellent tree shaking capabilities. It can eliminate unused code from your bundles, resulting in smaller output files.

**Support for TypeScript**: Both `tsup` and `esbuild` have strong support for TypeScript, so you can write your code in TypeScript without any issues.

**CommonJS and ES Modules**: esbuild can generate both CommonJS and ES module outputs, which makes it versatile and compatible with various JavaScript environments.

To install as a development dependency:

```bash
npm i tsup -D
```

Create a script into `package.json` file:

```json
"build": "tsup src --out-dir build"
```

To run the `build`:

```bash
npm run build
```

After running the code, it will be created a `build` folder that has all the code in javascript.

It's necessary to guarantee that the code is working when running:

```bash
node build/server.js
```

## Build Code Ehhncement

Since the code is in JavaScript, we need to make sure the eslint is ignoring the `build` folder. To do that, create a file `.eslintignore`:

```text
node_modules
build
```

**IMPORTANT**: the `build` folder needs to be added into the `.gitignore` file.

## Enhancing the .gitignore file

It's good to start to categorize the .gitignore file, adding comments.

```text
# Dependencies
node_modules

# Database
db/*.db

# Environment
.env
.env.test

# Build
build
```

## Send your code to GitHub

Note: Make sure to initiate Git and commit your code first, if you haven't already. It's important to make small commits as you develop your application.

```bash
git init
git add .
git commit -m "Initial commit"
```

Using [GitHub CLI](https://cli.github.com/), you can log in using:

```bash
gh repo create
```

You will choose the option: `Push an existing local repository to GitHub`.
If you are executing the command under your project folder, the `Path to local repository` should be (.) as default.
Choose the Repository name and owner, description, visibility, `Add a remote` should be Y, so we are able to make `git push`, name of the remote can be the default `origin` and you can push the commits made previously into GitHub.

To check the repo via the browser, you can run the command:

```bash
gh repo view -w
```

## Deploy platforms

Some examples:

- [render](render.com)
- [fly.io](fly.io)
- [Railway](railway.app)

It's important to notice that you can start to use a free tool, but eventually you will need a paid tool.

For this example, we will use Render.

### Create database on your render account

After creating your account on render, create a Postgres database.

- Choose a unique name for your database
- Choose a Region
- And create the database.

Note: All free databases on render will expire in 90 days.

### Code changes - Database Support (SQLite & Postgres)

Your application will run in SQLite on Dev & Test environment, but in Production will run under Postgres. For that to happen, we need to change the environment configuration.

1. On the `index.ts` file, when defining the schema:

    ```js
    const envSchema = z.object({
        NODE_ENV: z.enum(['development', 'test', 'production']).default('production'),
        DATABASE_CLIENT: z.enum(['sqlite', 'pg']),
        DATABASE_URL: z.string(),
        PORT: z.number().default(3333),
    })
    ```

    Note: knex uses client `pg`.

2. It's necessary to install Postgres as a dependency (general dependency, since we are going to use in Production):

    ```bash
    npm i pg
    ```

    Note: In this case, `sqllite` can be changed from a dependency to a devDependency on the `package.json` file.

3. It's necessary to change the `.env`, `.env.example`, `.env.test`, `.env.test.example` file to add the new Environment variable: `DATABASE_CLIENT`.

    ```text
    DATABASE_CLIENT=sqlite3
    ```

4. It's necessary to change the client on `database.ts` file:

    Note: there are differences when connecting to Postgres or SQLite via knex - the connection string can be an object or a string.

    ```js
    export const config: Knex.Config = {
        client: env.DATABASE_CLIENT,
        connection: 
            env.DATABASE_CLIENT === 'sqlite' 
                ? {
                    filename: env.DATABASE_URL,
                } 
                : env.DATABASE_URL,
        useNullAsDefault: true,
        migrations: {
            extension: 'ts',
            directory: './db/migrations', 
        }
    }
    ```

5. It's necessary to change node version in `package.json`:

    ```json
    "engines": { 
        "node": ">=18"
    }
    ```

6. It's necessary to change the port before sending to render because it's expecting to be a string and on our application has number on the schema. Zod has a function `coerce` to help us to convert the data to number. So, on the `index.ts` file:

    ```json
    PORT: z.coerce.number().default(3333),
    ```

Finally, send updates to GitHub.

### Final step: Create a new application on render

First, copy the Internal Database URL from the Database created on render.

Create a new Web Service and choose to `Build and deploy from a Git repository`, selecting the repository you created in GitHub.

- Choose a name for your webservice;
- Choose the same region from the database to decrease the latency.
- Branch can be `main`, as default, but it depends on what you are using.
- Root Directory is in case you have many projects inside your GitHub repository. In this case, if you create everything from scratch on an empty Repository, should be empty.
- For build command it's necessary to add the command to install all dependencies, run our migrations and build our application: `npm install && npm run knex -- migrate:latest && npm run build`.
- Define the start command to run your application: `node build/server.js`.

Click in **advance** to configure the environment variable: 

```text
key: DATABASE_CLIENT
value: pg

key: DATABASE_URL
value: [value from Internal Database URL]
```

Note: by having the `Auto-Deploy` as `Yes`, means that everytime a push is made on the GitHub repo a deploy will be done automatically.

### Configure Insomnia to Test application

To facilitate, create a new environment in Insomnia:

Manage Environments, and create two environments: `dev` and `prod`.

`dev` environment:

```json
{
    "url": "http://localhost:3333"
}
```

`prod` environment:

```json
{
    "url": "https://aula-02-api-rest-node-js.onrender.com"
}
```

Note: Choose colors to facilitate.
